[Opening jingle]
Hi and welcome to The Bread Kitchen.
When I was growing up, no trip to a cafè with my mother was complete without a toasted teacake.
So today I'm gonna show you how to make the classic English Teacake
which despite it's name, isn't a cake at all!
I'm gonna make 6 reasonably large teacakes and for that I've got 450 g of bread flour,
285 ml of slightly warm milk,
a 125 g of sultanas or you could use raisins or currants or a mixture,
2 tablespoons of caster sugar. I happened to be using golden caster sugar but any fine sugar will do,
2 teaspoons of yeast - dried yeast
and here there's a teaspoon of salt, a quarter of a teaspoon of cinnamon
and a couple of big pinches of cloves and ground ginger.
Put the yeast
and the sugar to the milk.
Give it a good whisk
and then leave it 10 minutes for the yeast to activate.
Meanwhile, sift the spices and the salt into a bowl
and then sift in the flour, just to get rid of any lumps.
Make a well in the middle of the flour,
pour in the milk and yeast
and mix to a nice, soft dough.
What you should end up with is a nice, soft dough which is slightly tacky, not sticky 'cos it's not sticking to my hands
but you can fee, it's...
It's like the glue on a posting note.
I'll now knead the dough, on a floured surface,
for 5 minutes and give it a good kneading.
After 5 minutes of punishing your dough,
spread it out a bit,
add on the sultanas
and then, fold the dough over
and then begin kneading to disperse the
sultanas throughout the dough. Now some of them will pop out
but that's OK 'cos you can pop them in again.
Knead this for a couple of more minutes.
When you've got the sultanas throughout the dough
and it's quite springy. Pop it in a lightly-oiled bowl,
cover it, then put it in a warm place and allow the dough to double in size.
Ooh! I'm loving this puffed-up puffiness!
So I'll just flour the surface again,
turn the dough out,
knock it back a bit
and I'll just knead it for about 2 minutes.
Alright. Now I'm gonna cut this dough in six pieces.
You can cut it into
eight if you want smaller teacakes.
I'll take each piece and make it into a nice ball
by kinda folding it in under itself.
Just press the balls down slightly to flatten them a bit
then pop them onto a lightly-greased baking tray.
Cover with some clingfilm which you've lightly-oiled
and then we'll put them in a warm place for about 45 minutes to an hour to allow them to rise.
These have risen rather nicely.
Now you can, if you wish, brush these with milk.
I'll just brush two of them to show you what the difference of the milk makes.
Now, I'll bake these in the oven at 175 degrees Celsius fan oven or 200 degrees Celsius normal oven for about 15 minutes.
And here they are. These two were milk-glazed and they've got like a satin-y finish to them?
Whereas these four which didn't have the milk glaze have got more of a matte finish.
So I just pop them on a wire rack to cool.
Ooh, they're a bit hot!
When they're cooled, your teacakes should be nice and soft.
Let's cut one open!
Oooh! Lovely! I can't wait to get this toasted!
I do love toasted Teacakes. They're a real connection with my childhood.
The best way to eat these is to slice them in half,
toast them, slather them with butter
and you can eat them like that or maybe put some slices of cheese on top or jam.
Whatever you want, really.
I hope you enjoy making your Teacakes. Thanks for watching and join me again in The Bread Kitchen.
[Closing jingle]